could I protect my father from the armed
Islamic group with a paring knife that
was the question I faced one Tuesday
morning in June of 1993 when I was a law
student I woke up early that morning in
Dad's apartment on the outskirts of
Algiers Algeria
to an unrelenting pounding on the front
door it was a season as described by a
local paper when every Tuesday a scholar
fell to the bullets of fundamentalist
assassins my father's University
Teaching of Darwin had already provoked
a classroom visit from the head of the
so-called Islamic Salvation Front who
denounced dad as an advocate of biology
is embedded the man and now whoever was
outside would neither identify himself
nor go away so my father tried to get
the police on the phone but perhaps
terrified by the rising tide of armed
extremism that had already claimed the
lives of so many Algerian officers they
didn't even answer and that was when I
went to the kitchen got out a paring
knife and took up a position inside the
entryway it was a ridiculous thing to do
really but I couldn't think of anything
else and so there I stood when I look
back now I think that that was the
moment that set me on the path to
writing a book called your fatwa does
not apply here untold stories from the
fight against Muslim fundamentalism the
title comes from a Pakistani play I
think it was actually that moment that
sent me on the journey to interview 300
people of Muslim heritage from nearly 30
countries from Afghanistan to Mali to
find out how they fought fundamentalism
peacefully like my father did and how
they coped with the attendant risks
luckily back in June of 1993 our
unidentified visitor went away but other
families were so much less lucky and
that was the thought that motivated my
research in any case someone would
return a few months later and leave a
note on Dad's kitchen table which simply
said consider yourself dead
subsequently Algeria's fundamentalist
armed groups would murder as many as
200,000 civilians in what came to be
known as the dark decade of the 1990s
including every single one of the women
that you see here in its harsh
counter-terrorist response the state
resorted to torture and to force
disappearances and as terrible as all of
these events became the international
community largely ignored them finally
my father an Algerian peasant son turned
professor was forced to stop teaching at
the University and to flee his apartment
but what I will never forget about my
food by noon my dad was that like so
many other Algerian intellectuals he
refused to leave the country and he
continued to publish pointed criticisms
both of the fundamentalists and
sometimes that the government they
battled for example in a November 1994
series in the newspaper al-watan
entitled how fundamentalism produced a
terrorism without precedent
he denounced what he called the
terrorists radical break with the true
Islam as it was lived by our ancestors
these were words that could get you
killed my father's country taught me in
that dark decade of the 1990s that the
popular struggle against Muslim
fundamentalism is one of the most
important and overlooked human rights
struggles in the world this remains true
today nearly 20 years later you see in
every country where you hear about armed
jihad EES targeting civilians there are
also unarmed people defying those
militants that you don't hear about and
those people need our support to succeed
in the West it's often assumed that
Muslims generally condone terrorism some
on the right think this because they
view Muslim culture is inherently
violent and some on the left imagine
this because they view Muslim violence
fundamentalist violence solely as a
product of legitimate grievances but
both views are dead wrong in fact many
people of Muslim heritage around the
world are staunch opponents
both of fundamentalism and of terrorism
and often for very good reason you see
they're much more likely to be victims
of this violence than its perpetrators
let me just give you one example
according to a 2009 survey of Arabic
language media resources between 2004
and 2008 no more than 15% of al-qaeda's
victims were Westerners that's a
terrible toll but the vast majority were
people of Muslim heritage killed by
Muslim fundamentalists now I've been
talking for the last five minutes about
fundamentalism and you have a right to
know exactly what I mean I cite the
definition given by the Algerian
sociologist Maria May le Lucas and she
says that fundamentalisms note the s so
within all of the world's great
religious traditions fundamentalisms are
political movements of the extreme right
which in a context of globalization
manipulate religion in order to achieve
their political aims sadhya Abbas has
called this the radical politicization
of theology now I want to avoid
projecting the notion that there's sort
of a monolith out there called Muslim
fundamentalism that is the same
everywhere because these movements also
have their diversities some use and
advocate violence some do not though
they're often interrelated they take
different forms some may be
nongovernmental organizations even here
in Britain like caged prisoners some may
become political parties like the Muslim
Brotherhood and some may be openly armed
groups like the Taliban but in any case
these are all radical projects they're
not conservative or traditional
approaches they're most often about
changing people's relationship with
Islam rather than preserving it what I'm
talking about is the Muslim extreme
right and the fact that its adherents
are or purport to be Muslim makes them
no less offensive than the extreme right
anywhere else so in my view if we
consider ourselves liberal or left-wing
human rights loving or feminist we must
oppose these movements and support their
grassroots opponent
now let me be clear that I support an
effective struggle against
fundamentalism but also a struggle that
must itself respect international law so
nothing I am saying should be taken as a
justification for refuses to democratize
and here I send out a shout out of
support to the pro-democracy movement in
Algeria today that a ket nor should
anything I say be taken as a
justification of violations of human
rights like the mass death sentences
handed out in Egypt earlier this week
but what I am saying is that we must
challenge these Muslim fundamentalist
movements because they threaten human
rights across Muslim majority contexts
and they do this in a range of ways most
obviously with the direct attacks on
civilians by the armed groups that carry
those out but that violence is just the
tip of the iceberg these movements as a
whole pervade discrimination against
religious minorities and sexual
minorities they seek to curtail the
freedom of religion of everyone who
either practices in a different way or
chooses not to practice and most
defining Lee they lead an all-out war on
the rights of women now faced with these
movements in recent years Western
discourse is most often offered to
flawed responses the first that one
sometimes finds on the right suggests
that most Muslims are fundamentalist or
something about Islam is inherently
fundamentalist and this is just
offensive and wrong but unfortunately on
the left one sometimes encounters a
discourse that is too politically
correct to acknowledge the problem of
Muslim fundamentalism at all or even
worse apologizes for it and this is
unacceptable as well so what I'm seeking
is a new way of talking about this
altogether which is grounded in the
lived experiences and the hope of the
people on the frontlines I'm painfully
aware that there has been an increase in
discrimination against Muslims in recent
years in countries like the UK and the
u.s. and that too is a matter of grave
concern but I firmly believe that
telling these counter stereotypical
stories of people of Muslim heritage who
have confronted the fundamentalists and
been their primary victims
is also a great way of countering that
discrimination so now let me introduce
you to four people whose stories I had
the great honor of telling Faison piers
Ada and the raphe Pier Theatre Workshop
named for his father have for years
promoted the Performing Arts in Pakistan
with the rise of jihadist violence they
began to receive threats to call off
their events which they refused to heed
and so a bomber struck their 2008 8th
world performing arts festival in Lahore
producing rain of glass that fell into
the venue injuring nine people and later
that same night the pier Zetas made a
very difficult decision they announced
that their festival would continue as
planned the next day as Faison said at
the time if we bow down to the Islamists
we'll just be sitting in a dark corner
but they didn't know what would happen
would anyone come in fact thousands of
people came out the next day to support
the Performing Arts in Lahore and this
simultaneously thrilled and terrified
Faison and he ran up to a woman who had
come in with her two small children he
said you do know there was a bomb here
yesterday and you do know there's a
threat here today and she said I know
that but I came to your festival with my
mother when I was their age and I still
have those images in my mind we have to
be here with stalwart audiences like
this the piers ADA's were able to
conclude their festival on schedule and
then the next year they lost all of
their sponsors due to the security risk
so when I met them in 2010 they were in
the middle of the first subsequent event
that they were able to have in the same
venue and this was the ninth Youth
Performing Arts Festival held in Lahore
in a year when that city had already
experienced 44 terror attacks this was a
time when the Pakistani Taliban had
commenced their systematic targeting of
girls schools that would culminate in
the attack on Malala yousufzai what did
the pier Zetas do in that environment
they staged girls school theater
so I had the privilege of watching Naing
wall which was a musical in the Punjabi
language and the girls of Lahore grammar
school played all the parts they sang
and danced they played the mice and the
water buffalo and I held my breath
wondering would we get to the end of
this amazing show and when we did the
whole audience collectively exhaled and
a few people actually wept and then they
filled the auditorium with the peaceful
boom of their applause and I remember
thinking in that moment that the Bombers
made headlines here two years before but
this night and these people are as
important to story maria Bashir is the
first and only woman chief prosecutor in
Afghanistan she's been in post since
2008 and actually opened an office to
investigate cases of violence against
women which she says is the most
important area in her mandate when I
meet her in her office in Lahore in
Herat excuse me she enters surrounded by
four large men with four huge guns in
fact she now has 23 bodyguards because
she has weathered bomb attacks that
nearly killed her kids and it took the
leg off of one of her guards
why does she continue she says with a
smile that that is the question that
everyone asks as she puts it why you
risk not living and it is simply that
for her a better future for all the
Maria Basheer's to come is worth the
risk and she knows that if people like
her do not take the risk
there will be no better future later on
in our interview prosecutor Bashir tells
me how worried she is about the possible
outcome of government negotiations with
the Taliban the people who have been
trying to kill her if we give them a
place in the government she asks who
will protect women's rights and she
urges the international community not to
forget its promise about women because
now they want peace with Taliban a few
weeks after I leave Afghanistan I see a
headline on the Internet
an Afghan prosecutor has been
assassinated I Google desperately and
thankfully that day I find out that
Maria was not the victim though sadly
another Afghan prosecutor was gunned
down on his way to work and when I hear
headlines like that now I think that as
international troops leave Afghanistan
this year and beyond we must continue to
care about what happens to people there
- all of the Maria Bashir's sometimes I
still hear her voice in my head saying
with no bravado whatsoever the situation
of the women of Afghanistan will be
better someday we should prepare the
ground for this even if we are killed
there are no words adequate to denounce
the al-shabaab terrorists who attacked
the Westgate Mall in Nairobi on the same
day as a children's cooking competition
in September of 2013 they killed 67
including poets and pregnant women far
away in the American Midwest I had the
good fortune of meeting Somali Americans
who were working to counter the efforts
of el Shabab to recruit a small number
of young people from their city of
minneapolis to take part in atrocities
like Westgate Abdul Razak be he's
studious 17-year old nephew Burhan
Hassan was recruited here in 2008
spirited to Somalia and then killed when
he tried to come home since that time
mr. bihi who directs the no-budget
Somali education and advocacy center has
been vocally denouncing the recruitment
and the failures of government and
Somali American institutions like the
Abu Becket acidic Islamic Center where
he believes his nephew was radicalized
during a youth program but he doesn't
just criticize the mosque he also takes
on the government for its failure to do
more to prevent poverty in his community
given his own lack of financial
resources mr. BAE has had to be creative
to counter the efforts of al-shabaab to
sway more disaffected youth in the wake
of the group's 2010 attack on world cup
viewers in Uganda he organized a
Madonn basketball tournament in
Minneapolis in response scores of Somali
American kids came out to embrace sport
despite the fatwa against it they played
basketball as Burhan Hassan never would
again
for his efforts mr. B has been
ostracized by the leadership of the abu
bakr as-siddiq islamic center with which
he used to have good relations he told
me one day we saw the imam on TV calling
us infidels and saying these families
are trying to destroy the mosque this is
at complete odds with how abdul razzaq
be he understands what he is trying to
do by exposing Al Shabaab recruitment
which is to save the religion I love
from a small number of extremists now I
want to tell one last story that of a 22
year old law student in Algeria named
mlz Nunes Delaney who had the same
dreams of a legal career that I did back
in the 90s she refused to give up her
studies despite the fact that the
fundamentalist battling the Algerian
state back then threatened all who
continued their education On January 26
1997 ml boarded the bus in Algiers where
she was studying to go home and spend a
Ramadan evening with her family and
would never finish law school when the
bus reached the outskirts of her
hometown it was stopped at a checkpoint
manned by men from the armed Islamic
group carrying her school bag ml was
taken off the bus and killed in the
street the men who cut her throat then
told everyone else if you go to
university the day will come when we
will kill all of you just like this M L
died at exactly 5:17 p.m. which we know
because when she fell in the street her
watch broke her mother showed me the
watch with the second hand still aimed
optimistically upward toward a 5:18 that
would never come shortly before her
death
amel had said to her mother of herself
and her sisters nothing will happen to
us
shahla God willing but if something
happens you must know that
we are dead for knowledge you and father
must keep your heads held high the loss
of such a young woman is unfathomable
and so as I did my research I found
myself searching for ml's hope again and
her name even means hope in Arabic I
think I found it in two places the first
is in the strength of her family and all
the other families to continue telling
their stories and to go on with their
lives despite the terrorism in fact ml's
sister Lamia overcame her grief went to
law school and practices as a lawyer in
Algiers today something which is only
possible because the armed
fundamentalists were largely defeated in
the country
and the second place I found ml's Hope
was everywhere
that women and men continued to defy the
jihadis we must support all of those in
honor of M L who continue this human
rights struggle today like the network
of women living under Muslim laws it is
not enough as the victims rights
advocate sharifa Hadar told me in
algiers it is not enough just to battle
terrorism we must also challenge
fundamentalism because fundamentalism is
the ideology that makes the bed of this
terrorism why is it that people like her
like all of them are not more well-known
why is it that everyone knows who Osama
bin Laden was and so few know of all of
those standing up to the bin Laden's in
their own contexts we must change that
and so I ask you to please help share
these stories through your networks look
again at M L zone UN's watch forever
frozen and now please look at your own
watch and decide this is the moment that
you commit to supporting people like M
oh we don't have the right to be silent
about them because it is easier or
because Western policy is flawed as well
because 5:17 is still coming - too many
a Mosin UN's in places like northern
Nigeria where jihadi still kills
students the time to speak up in support
of all of those who peacefully
challenged fundamentalism and terror
in their own communities is now thank
you
[Applause]